The Grid Game - A Visual Exploration of the Catalan Numbers

Suppose you are given an n by n grid. If you start with the bottom left corner of the grid, how many distict monotonic paths are there within the grid to reach the top right corner of the grid without crossing the main diagonal?

That's quite a mouthful, so let's visualize the grid to see exactly what I'm asking here. Lets say we have a 5 by 5 grid, and we draw a red line across the main diagonal. Our goal is to start at this location and end at this location, without crossing this red line For example, we can follow this path. Notice how it is ok to touch the diagonal but not cross it. This is considered a "monotonic path" since it only consists of up steps and right steps. So how would we go about counting how many of these paths there are in any given grid? 

Well the answer lies in a sequence called the Catalan Numbers, where the nth term is calculated by the following formula. So for any n by n grid, there are C sub n of these monotonic paths possible, where C sub n is the nth term in the sequence. So for our 5 by 5 example, the answer would be 42. 

The Catalan numbers are named after French mathemetician Eugene Charles Catalan, who was the first to obtain the standard formula shown earlier. The formulas arose durong his exploration of the Towers of Hanoi puzzle, which username has a great video on, linked in the description. Though named after Catalan, Euler discovered a closed formula for the sequence decades before. The reflection counting trick that we will show here was discovered by Désiré André in 1887. His proof made us of Dyck Words which are strings consisting of n X's and n Y's such that no initial segment of the string has more Y's than X's. The method can be applied to our monotonic paths. 

Let's go back to the 5 by 5 grid. If we start drawing monotonic paths (disregarding the diagonal for now), we will quickly see that we always make 8 moves to arrive at our destination. On a 5 by 5 grid, we make 10 moves. So in general, we make 2n moves to get to the top right corner. This makes sense, since on the n by n grid, where we can only move right and up, theres only room for n right steps and n up steps. So, this means there are 2n choose n ways to create a monotonic path from the bottom left to the top right of our grid. To get some intuition for this, we can see that for the paths we drew, we chose n right steps. These steps determine the path since there is only one set of up steps that complete the path and vice versa. 

So have have a number for the total number of monotonic paths we can create with the correct start and end posistions. However, a lot of these paths cross the main diagonal. We can see that these "bad" paths that cross this diagonal always touch the next diagonal up, shown in purple. Now, we take the section of the path between the point where it touches the purple diagonal and the point where it touches the main diagonal again, and flip it across the purple diagonal. As a sidebar, note that every path (bad or not), touches the main diagonal again since the end position lies on the main diagonal.